
Logging Configuration in dtPyAppFramework
=========================================

The **\ ``dtPyAppFramework``\ ** provides a robust logging framework to ensure effective monitoring and debugging of your application. Logging can be configured to send logs to both file output and the console or exclusively to log files based on your preferences.

Logging Configuration
---------------------

When the framework is initialised, logging is configured based on the parameters provided to the **\ ``AbstractApp``\ ** class, specifically the **\ ``console_app``\ ** parameter. This parameter determines whether logs should be sent to the console (\ ``stdout``\ ) in addition to log files.

**Console App Logging:**

If **\ ``console_app``\ ** is set to **\ ``True``\ **\ :


* Logs will be output to both the console (stdout) and log files.
* Different colors are used to represent different log levels:

  * GREEN: Info
  * ORANGE: Warning
  * RED: Error or Exceptions

* Log files are stored in a timestamp-named directory under the application logging root path.

**File-Only Logging:**

If **\ ``console_app``\ ** is set to **\ ``False``\ **\ :


* All output to **\ ``stdout``\ ** or **\ ``stderr``\ ** will be redirected to output files (\ **\ ``stdout.txt``\ ** and **\ ``stderr.txt``\ **\ ) within the application runtime log directory.
* Logs will not be displayed on the console.

Log Format
~~~~~~~~~~

The log format follows the pattern:

.. code-block:: scss

   '%(log_color)s%(asctime)s - %(levelname)-8s - %(processName)s.%(process)d - %(threadName)s.%(thread)d - %(module)s.%(funcName)s.%(lineno)-3d - %(message)s%(reset)s'

Example Configuration
---------------------

.. code-block:: python

   from dtPyAppFramework.application import AbstractApp

   # Create an instance of AbstractApp with console_app set to True
   app_instance = AbstractApp(description="My App", version="1.0", short_name="my_app", full_name="My Application", console_app=True)

   # Initialise logging based on the provided configuration
   app_instance.run()

Logging Usage
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: python

   import logging

   # Log messages with different log levels
   logging.debug("This is a debug message.")
   logging.info("This is an info message.")
   logging.warning("This is a warning message.")
   logging.error("This is an error message.")
   logging.exception("This is an exception message.")

The logging framework in the **\ ``dtPyAppFramework``\ ** helps you manage and view logs efficiently, making it easier to monitor and troubleshoot your application.

Logging Configuration in dtPyAppFramework
-----------------------------------------

The default logging level in the **\ ``dtPyAppFramework``\ ** is set to INFO. This configuration can be overridden by setting the **\ ``logging.level``\ ** key to an alternative level within the **\ ``config.yaml``\ ** file, which is the settings file for the framework.

Modifying Logging Level
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To change the logging level, follow these steps:


#. Locate the **\ ``config.yaml``\ ** file in the root of your application, or the application or user paths.
#. Find or add the **\ ``logging.level``\ ** key within the file.
#. Update the value associated with **\ ``logging.level``\ ** to your desired logging level.

Logging Levels
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The available logging levels, in decreasing order of severity, are as follows:


* CRITICAL
* ERROR
* WARNING
* INFO
* DEBUG

Example Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: yaml

   logging:
     level: DEBUG

In this example, the logging level is set to DEBUG, which includes all log messages, making it suitable for detailed debugging.

By adjusting the logging level, you can control the verbosity of logs generated by your application, tailoring it to your specific needs and debugging requirements.

Custom Logging Configuration in **\ ``dtPyAppFramework``\ **
----------------------------------------------------------------

In the **\ ``dtPyAppFramework``\ **\ , you have the flexibility to implement your own logging configuration by defining a **\ ``loggingConfig.yaml``\ ** file. This allows you to tailor the logging behavior to your specific requirements.

Creating a Custom Logging Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Follow these steps to create a custom logging configuration:


#. 
   Locate or create a **\ ``loggingConfig.yaml``\ ** file.


   * Place it in one of the following directories (the first occurrence found will be used):

     * **\ ``<user_data_root>/loggingConfig.yaml``\ **
     * **\ ``<app_data_root>/loggingConfig.yaml``\ **
     * **\ ``<current_working_directory>/config/loggingConfig.yaml``\ **

#. 
   Define your logging configuration within the **\ ``loggingConfig.yaml``\ ** file.

Example Logging Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

ere's a simple example of a **\ ``loggingConfig.yaml``\ ** file:

.. code-block:: yaml

   version: 1
   formatters:
     detailed:
       format: '%(log_color)s%(asctime)s - %(levelname)-8s - %(processName)s.%(process)d - %(threadName)s.%(thread)d - %(module)s.%(funcName)s.%(lineno)-3d - %(message)s%(reset)s'

   handlers:
     console:
       class: logging.StreamHandler
       level: DEBUG
       formatter: detailed
       stream: ext://sys.stdout

     file:
       class: logging.FileHandler
       level: INFO
       formatter: detailed
       filename: path/to/your/logfile.log

   root:
     level: DEBUG
     handlers: [console, file]

In this example, we define a custom formatter named **\ ``detailed``\ ** and two handlers: one for console output (\ **\ ``console``\ **\ ) and another for file output (\ **\ ``file``\ **\ ). Adjust the configuration to meet your specific needs.

Using the Custom Logging Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When the **\ ``dtPyAppFramework``\ ** initialises, it will look for the **\ ``loggingConfig.yaml``\ ** file based on the specified search path logic. If found, it will use the custom logging configuration defined in that file. If not found, the default logging settings will be applied.

This feature allows you to have fine-grained control over your application's logging behavior and tailor it according to your preferences.
